+++
title = "oneAPI.jl 1.0: oneMKL, Intel Arc and Julia 1.9"
author = "Tim Besard"
abstract = """
  The release of oneAPI.jl 1.0 adds integration with the oneAPI Math Kernel
  Library (oneMKL) to accelerate linear algebra operations on Intel GPUs.
  It also brings support for Julia 1.9 and Intel Arc GPUs."""
+++

{{abstract}}


## oneMKL integration

oneAPI.jl now uses the Intel oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL), automatically
downloaded via `oneAPI_Support_jll.jl`, to provide a great number of BLAS and
LAPACK operations on Intel GPUs. Similar to how it is implemented in our other
GPU back-ends, these wrappers are available at different levels.

At the lowest level, we provide a C library that provides BLAS and LAPACK-like
functions that the oneMKL C++ APIs. For example, the
`oneapi::mkl::blas::column_major::gemm` function for matrix-matrix
multiplication is wrapped by the C functions `onemklSgemm`, `onemklDgemm`, etc.
These wrappers are used to implement low-level methods like `oneMKL.gemm!`:

```julia-repl
julia> using oneAPI

julia> A = oneArray(rand(Float32, 2, 3));
2×3 oneMatrix{Float32, oneAPI.oneL0.DeviceBuffer}:
 0.44302   0.125576  0.859145
 0.674291  0.428346  0.0400119
julia> B = oneArray(rand(Float32, 3, 4))
3×4 oneMatrix{Float32, oneAPI.oneL0.DeviceBuffer}:
 0.592748   0.529413   0.0323396  0.659528
 0.22489    0.0872259  0.253291   0.376519
 0.0121506  0.591135   0.706755   0.751686
julia> C = similar(B, (2, 4));

julia> oneMKL.gemm!('N', 'N', true, A, B, true, C)
2×4 oneMatrix{Float32, oneAPI.oneL0.DeviceBuffer}:
 0.301279  0.753365  0.65334   0.985274
 0.496501  0.417994  0.158581  0.63607

julia> Array(C) ≈ Array(A) * Array(B)
true
```

Of course, these low-level functions aren't very user-friendly, so we also
integrate with Julia's standard libraries where possible:

```julia-repl
julia> A = oneArray(rand(Float32, 2, 3));
julia> B = oneArray(rand(Float32, 3, 4));

julia> using LinearAlgebra
julia> C = A * B;

julia> Array(C) ≈ Array(A) * Array(B)
true
```

Not all oneMKL functionality has been wrapped yet, and not every wrapper has
been properly hooked up to Julia's standard libraries either. If you run into an
issue, please consider taking a look at the source and contributing to
oneAPI.jl! The current state of the wrappers should make it easy to extend their
functionality, as well as form a good basis for integrating with other libraries
like oneDNN.


## Other changes

- oneAPI.jl's toolchain has also been updated to support the new Arc series of
  discrete Intel GPUs. Note that these require the upcoming Linux 6.2 kernel.
- Support for Julia 1.9 has been added.
